Create Editing ConfigMaps page (#6466)
knative/docs: docs/versioned/admin/editing-configmaps.md

## The _example key

ConfigMap files installed by Knative contain an `_example` key that shows the usage and purpose of a configuration key. This key does not affect Knative behavior, but contains a value which acts as a documentation comment.

In case a user edits the `_example` key by mistakenly thinking their edits would have an affect, the administrator needs to be alerted. The Knative webhook server determines if the `_example key` has been altered. The edit is caught when the value of the checksum for the `_example` key is different when compared with the pod's template annotations. If the checksum is null however, it does not create the warning.

Accordingly, you cannot alter the contents of the `_example` key, but you can delete the `_example` key altogether or delete the annotation:

```yml
...
annotations:
    knative.dev/example-checksum: "47c2487f"
```

> To accurately create a ConfigMap using an existing file, use the Kubernetes[Define the key to use when creating a configmap from a file](https://kubernetes.io/dos/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/#define-the-key-to-use-when-creating-a-configmap-from-a-file)

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't scan.  I'm not sure what you're trying to link to or reference here.

---
audience: administrator
components:
  - serving
  - eventing
function: explanation
---
# Editing ConfigMaps

This page provides information and best practices for editing ConfigMaps. While there is no technical difference in how Knative uses ConfigMaps in Kubernetes, you should be aware of the following points and tips while working with ConfigMaps:

- The _example key. Don't modify.
- Value propagation. Know when changes to default settings take affect.
- Version control. Use ConfigMaps for version control.

> The most common way to use ConfigMaps is to configure settings for containers running in a Pod, or in multiple pods, that use a specified namespace. There are a number of other ways to use ConfigMaps as described in [Kubernetes ConfigMaps](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/) documentation.

Reviewer: This seems misleading, as this is not how the Knative controllers use ConfigMaps.  Developers can still use ConfigMaps for these purposes, but that is a separate topic in a different area of the documentation (if needed).

## The _example key

> ConfigMap files installed by Knative contain an `_example` key that shows the usage and purpose of a configuration key. The key itself is not a key, but a long comment.

Reviewer: "The key itself is not a key" doesn't make sense.  Maybe:

> This key does not affect Knative behavior, but contains a value which acts as a documentation comment.

> In case a user edits the `_example` key by mistakenly thinking their edits would have an affect, the administrator needs to be alerted. The Knative webhook server determines if the `_example key` has been altered. The edit is caught when the value of the checksum for the `_example` key is different when compared with the pod's template annotations. If the checksum is null however, it does not create the warning.

Author: Got the Quickstart going and made a change to `config-defaults` - here's the error text:

```
```bash
error: configmaps "config-defaults" could not be patched: admission webhook "config.webhook.serving.knative.dev" denied the request: validation failed: the update modifies a key in "_example" which is probably not what you want. Instead, copy the respective setting to the top-level of the ConfigMap, directly below "data"
You can run `kubectl replace -f /var/folders/9t/yzwp6zrx765clbvl1c_dqc2r0000gn/T/kubectl-edit-2068368769.yaml` to try this update again.
```

Accordingly, you cannot alter the contents of the `_example` key, but you can delete the `_example` key altogether or delete the annotation:

```yml
...
annotations:
    knative.dev/example-checksum: "47c2487f"
```

To accurately create a ConfigMap using an existing file, use the Kubernetes[Define the key to use when creating a configmap from a file](https://kubernetes.io/dos/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/#define-the-key-to-use-when-creating-a-configmap-from-a-file)

## Value propagation

> The ConfigMap change is immediate in the Kubernetes API, but its effect on Pods or applications depends on how the ConfigMap is consumed (volume, environment variables, or API) and whether the application or Pod is designed to pick up the change dynamically or requires a restart. For volumes, updates propagate within seconds, but for environment variables, a Pod restart is needed.

Reviewer: None of this applies to the Knative controllers, which use the Kubernetes Watch API to be informed of any changes to the ConfigMap roughly as soon as they happen.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if any of this "value propagation" information is necessary given how Knative watches ConfigMaps directly.

    ```yml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: my-app-config
      namespace: default
    data:
      _example | ...
      app.properties: |
        version=1.2.3
        db.host=localhost
        db.port=5432
    ```

- Commit these files to a Git repository to track changes over time.

### Versioning ConfigMaps in Git

- Use meaningful commit messages to describe changes to ConfigMap data (e.g., "Updated app.properties to version 1.2.4").
- Tag commits in Git with version numbers (e.g., `git tag config-v1.2.3`) to mark specific ConfigMap versions.
- Use branches for different environments (e.g., `dev`, `staging`, `prod`) or feature-specific ConfigMap changes.

### Track Object Version in ConfigMap

- Include a version field in the ConfigMap’s data to explicitly track the version of the application or configuration it represents.

    ```yaml
    data:
    app.properties: |
      version=1.2.3
      # other settings
    ```

- Alternatively, use annotations in the ConfigMap’s metadata:

    ```yaml
    metadata:
      name: my-app-config
      annotations:
        app-version: "1.2.3"

>     ```

Reviewer: (this still seems to be an issue)

### Use GitOps for Deployment

- Implement a GitOps workflow with tools like ArgoCD or Flux to synchronize ConfigMaps from Git to your Kubernetes cluster.

> - These tools detect changes in the Git repository and automatically apply them to the cluster, ensuring the deployed ConfigMap matches the versioned configuration in Git.

Reviewer: Once the ConfigMaps are checked in to Git, there are three options for applying them:

1. Use a tool like ArgoCD or Flux to apply them.  This makes sense if you've got one of them set up already (and is generally considered a best practice).
2. Update the Git source of truth, then manually apply the ConfigMap with `kubectl apply --file $filename`.
3. Apply the new configuration with `kubectl apply --file $filename`, and then commit the change afterward if the results are as expected.

I'd probably use two headings for this -- "Automatic Application Via Continuous Delivery" and "Manual Application"

### Immutable ConfigMaps with Versioned Names

- Create immutable ConfigMaps by appending a version or hash to the ConfigMap name (e.g., `my-app-config-v1.2.3` or `my-app-config-abc123`).
- Update the application’s Deployment or Pod to reference the new ConfigMap version when rolling out changes.

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          containers:
          - name: my-app
            envFrom:
            - configMapRef:
                name: my-app-config-v1.2.3
    ```

- This approach ensures ConfigMaps are not modified in-place, preserving historical versions.

### Track Changes in Kubernetes

- Use Kubernetes resource versioning (e.g., `resourceVersion` in metadata) to track changes to the ConfigMap object itself within the cluster. However, this is managed by Kubernetes and not suitable for application-level versioning.
- Enable audit logging in Kubernetes to track who modified ConfigMaps and when.

### Use Helm for Versioned Configurations

- If using Helm, store ConfigMaps in Helm chart templates or values files and version the chart itself (e.g., `Chart.yaml` with `version: 1.2.3`).

> - Helm’s release history can track which ConfigMap versions were deployed.

Reviewer: Helm can be used this way, but neither Serving nor Eventing currently publishes a helm chart, so this is probably not helpful.

### Automate Version Updates

- Use CI/CD pipelines (e.g., GitHub Actions, Jenkins) to automate updates to the version field in ConfigMaps when the application version changes.
- Example: A pipeline updates `app.properties` with `version=1.2.4` and commits the change to Git.

### Validate and Test Changes

- Before applying ConfigMaps, validate their syntax and content using tools like `kubeval` or `kubectl apply --dry-run=client`.

> - Test ConfigMap changes in a staging environment to ensure compatibility with the application version.

Reviewer: These are general best-practices, but I think the more useful thing to know is that Knative will do some validation when the ConfigMap is updated.  (Verify this in a `quickstart` cluster, and you might include the error messages provided.)

Note that ConfigMaps in general don't support this type of validation, but Knative has added validating admission webhooks to perform these checks before the configuration is submitted to the cluster.

---
audience: administrator
components:
  - serving
  - eventing
function: explanation
---

# Working with ConfigMaps

> This page provides important information and best practices for working with Kubernetes ConfigMaps. ConfigMaps are the primary means for managing configuration values for Knative controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides important Knative-specific information and best practices for managing cluster configuration using ConfigMaps. ConfigMaps are the primary means for managing configuration values for Knative controllers.
```

If you are using the Knative Operator to install and manage your Knative cluster, you should not edit the ConfigMaps directly as the Operator will overwrite the changes. See [Configuring Knative by using the Operator](../install/operator/configuring-with-operator.md) for information on how to manage ConfigMaps using the operator.

## The _example key

ConfigMap files installed by Knative contain an `_example` key that shows the usage and purpose of all the known configuration keys in that ConfigMap. This key does not affect Knative behavior, but contains a value which acts as a documentation comment.

> If a user edits the `_example` key by mistakenly thinking their edits don't effect on the cluster operation, the Knative webhook catches the error and alerts the user that their update could not be patched. More specifically, the edit is caught when the value of the checksum for the `_example` key is different when compared with the `knative.dev/example-checksum` annotation on the ConfigMap. If the checksum is null or missing, the webhook server does not create the warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a user edits the `_example` key rather than creating a new key in the ConfigMap, the changes won't affect the cluster cluster configuration, which can be confusing. The Knative webhook flags this error and alerts the user that their update could not be patched. More specifically, the edit is caught when the checksum for the `_example` key differs from the `knative.dev/example-checksum` annotation on the ConfigMap. If the checksum is null or missing, the webhook does not create the warning.
```

The sentence here had some awkward wording "by mistakenly thinking ... don't effect on ...".  I _think_ this reads more smoothly?

---
audience: administrator
components:
  - serving
  - eventing
function: explanation
---

# Using ConfigMaps

This page provides important information and best practices for working with Kubernetes ConfigMaps. ConfigMaps and YAML resource files are the primary means for storing configuration values in Knative.

## The _example key

ConfigMap files installed by Knative contain an `_example` key that shows the usage and purpose of a configuration key. This key does not affect Knative behavior, but contains a value which acts as a documentation comment.

> If a user edits the `_example` key by mistakenly thinking their edits will have an affect, the Knative webhook server catches the error with the following alert text (using the `config-defaults` ConfigMap as a example):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a user edits the `_example` key by mistakenly thinking their edits will have an affect, the Knative webhook catches the error with the following alert text (using the `config-defaults` ConfigMap as a example):
```

  namespace: knative-serving
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: knative-serving
    app.kubernetes.io/component: controller
    app.kubernetes.io/version: devel
  annotations:
    knative.dev/example-checksum: "5b64ff5c"
data:
  _example: |
    ################################
    #                              #
    #    EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION     #
    #                              #
    ################################

    # This block is not actually functional configuration,
    # but serves to illustrate the available configuration
    # options and document them in a way that is accessible
    # to users that `kubectl edit` this config map.
    #
  . . . 
    # In environments with large number of services it is suggested
    # to set this value to `false`.
    # See https://github.com/knative/serving/issues/8498.
    enable-service-links: "false"
```

## Best practices

### Validate and Test Changes

- Before applying ConfigMaps, validate their syntax and content using tools like `kubeval` or `kubectl apply --dry-run=server`.
- Test ConfigMap changes in a staging environment to ensure compatibility with the application version.

### Storage and versioning

> - Periodically export ConfigMaps from the cluster (`kubectl get configmap -o yaml`) and commit them to Git for recovery purposes. Include applicable version numbers in `app.properties` as needed.

Reviewer: More concretely, I'd suggest prefixing this sentence with something like "If you manage the ConfigMap by using `kubectl edit`, periodically ..."

And then I'd add a second bullet point saying "If you manage the ConfigMap by keeping the definition in Git and automatically applying it to the cluster (GitOps), ..."

```yml linenums="1" hl_lines="11"
piVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: config-defaults
  namespace: knative-serving
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: knative-serving
    app.kubernetes.io/component: controller
    app.kubernetes.io/version: devel
  annotations:
    knative.dev/example-checksum: "5b64ff5c"
data:
  _example: |
    ################################
    #                              #
    #    EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION     #
    #                              #
    ################################

    # This block is not actually functional configuration,
    # but serves to illustrate the available configuration
    # options and document them in a way that is accessible
    # to users that `kubectl edit` this config map.
    #
  . . . 
    # In environments with large number of services it is suggested
    # to set this value to `false`.
    # See https://github.com/knative/serving/issues/8498.
    enable-service-links: "false"
```

> (1) Testing

Reviewer: Is this a stub of a section  or a leftover?

Author: A footnote annotation test. Removed now.

- Environment Variables - If the ConfigMap is used to set environment variables in a Pod, changes to the ConfigMap do not automatically propagate to the Pod. Pods must be restarted (e.g., by deleting and recreating them) for the updated ConfigMap values to take effect, as environment variables are set at container startup.
- Direct API Access - If an application directly queries the ConfigMap via the Kubernetes API, it will see the updated values immediately after the change is applied.
- Special Cases - Some applications or operators (e.g., those using tools like `reloader`) can watch for ConfigMap changes and automatically trigger Pod restarts or reloads.
- If the ConfigMap is used by a controller (e.g., a Deployment), changes might not affect running Pods unless the controller reconciles the change, which depends on its implementation.

## Best practices

This section provides recommended procedures for storage, monitoring, and version control of ConfigMaps.

### Validate and Test Changes

> - Before applying ConfigMaps, validate their syntax and content using tools like `kubeval` or `kubectl apply --dry-run=client`.

Reviewer: The `--dry-run=server` option should run the webhook validation, and is probably better than `--dry-run=client`.

        db.port=5432
    ```

### Git recommendations

In addition to diligent usage of commit messages, here are some suggestions for ConfigMaps in GitHub:

- Centralize ConfigMaps: Store all ConfigMaps in a dedicated directory in your Git repository (e.g., `k8s/configmaps/`).
- Tag commits in Git with version numbers (e.g., `git tag config-v1.2.3`) to mark specific ConfigMap versions.
- Implement a GitOps workflow with tools like ArgoCD or Flux to synchronize ConfigMaps from Git to your Kubernetes cluster.
- These tools detect changes in the Git repository and automatically apply them to the cluster, ensuring the deployed ConfigMap matches the versioned configuration in Git.

### Immutable ConfigMaps

> If you have services processing information that must not change, such as for finances and payment processing, consider using immutable ConfigMaps. This approach ensures ConfigMaps are not modified in-place, preserving historical versions.

Reviewer: Immutable ConfigMaps don't work for the Knative configuration, because the Knative controllers look up specific ConfigMap names, and immutable ConfigMaps need a new name each time.
